title:      PsPs 0x02
date:       Dec 06, 2016
properties: probset

## Contents

* 0x0200 Sup, `mymap`?
* 0x0201 Self-invocation of a lambda function
* 0x0202 Job distribution with Python coroutines


## 0. Sup, `mymap`?

Recently I heard about *Ur/Web* from my friend, fascinated by its well-known
benchmarking highlights and functional syntax unlike *Lisp*. But, for some
reason that might derive from a bitbucket, I didn't choose to pick up the basis
of some *ML*-family languages like *Haskell* and *OCaml*, but downloaded and
installed [Standard ML of New Jersey](http://www.smlnj.org/) (`smlnj`) to give
it a shot. There are many great tutorials and by-example guides to help with
learning this good ol' language, and I simply got
[this Learning-Standard-ML-In-Y-Minutes snippet](https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/standard-ml/)
with less than 200 lines of code and 100+ lines of really helpful and qualified
comments. Feel free to have a try in the suffusion of blue of the functional
universe. `:D`

> *Hey so where the hell is the problem?*

Pattern matching and infix operators are, at first sight, kinda eerie but
attention-grabbing. I noticed the implementation of `map` just looked so tight
and it basically blew my mind. Check it out:

```sml
fun map f [] = []
  | map f (x::xs) = f(x) :: map f xs
```

The second match of `map` could destructure the first element of the list and
invoke itself with the rest of the elements as the argument. *Holy shmoly.*

So at the moment I just asked myself... How we implemented it in the imperative
world? In Python I thought it was easy to deal with. Destructuring the first
item and recursive invocation are not actually unrealistic, but it doesn't come
so naturally in a *pythonic* way. We could iterate with the given list, call
the function with its items, and finally add the results to a temporary list for
returning. However, as you can tell, list comprehension could ease this pain.

```python
def mymap(func, lst):
    return [func(i) for i in lst]
```

> Bam! Not a problem yo!

Surely it is painless. But meanwhile I re-examined the usage of `map()` in py35,
where it could map multiple *iterables* (e.g. `list`, `set`) in parallel. For
instance:

```python
>>> list(map(lambda x, y: x * y, [1, 2], [3, 4]))
[3, 8]
```
So why not extend our little `mymap()` for a better use? It's not that
complicated anyway, where an `*` operator and a `zip()` are the keys to the
solutions.

```python
mymap = lambda func, lst, *lsts: [func(*i) for i in zip(lst, *lsts)]
```

Oops, I just bound a lambda function to `mymap`, which might look more compact
and subtle. Note that `map()` in Python is implemented in C
([source here](https://hg.python.org/cpython/file/tip/Python/bltinmodule.c#l940))
which returns an iterable object called `map`. Since it is well-supported, let's
hug this built-in goodness!

Anyway, `mymap` doesn't look so bad, I think.

### Moreover

> *But what if it goes recursively like...* Yeah, I'm passionate to do that too!

The `::` operator of Standard ML that shows in `(x::xs)` is called `infixr`,
which means it is right-associative. So the first step for me is to find a
FIFO data type in Python to simulate the right-associative destructuring, for
which a `deque` in `collections` module is suitable here.

Since the entry `list` should be converted into a `deque`, I simply wrapped the
ready-to-go recursive function `fn` in `mymap()`, and also placed a temporary
list for returning. Here's my first try:

```python
from collections import deque


def mymap(func, lst):
    deq = deque(lst)
    ret = []

    def fn(f, q):
        if not q: return
        ret.append(f(q.popleft()))
        fn(f, q)

    fn(func, deq)
    return ret
```

Bingo! Now you may understand why I used a `deque` right here. Because of its
`popleft()` method, we could have some fun with our pythonic destructuring and
some mutability tricks, and don't even have to pass the slices like `lst[0]` and
`lst[1:]` to the function itself, where there might be a potential higher
complexity (Why? My guess is `popleft()` could take constant time here but list
slice may not steal the show for now. What do your think?). Sure that's a
reminder of a benchmarking some moments later.

> And now... let's shout out to `lambda`! Why not!

`lambda` is sometimes adorable for some performant and syntatic improvements.
However there are 1 statement and 2 expressions waiting for their encapsulation.
So how could we put all of these into a simple anonymous function? My answer
is... *ternary condition expression*!

```python
fn = lambda f, q: fn(f, q) if ret.append(f(q.popleft())) else None
# `else None' here is for returning from lambda, and due to the side effects in
# appending new items to the list, we can do this trick in the if condition.
# But note that this line won't work.
```

My thought about where to put the little naughty `append()` roughly depended on
the assumption of its returning a boolean, but in fact it returns `None` whether
it succeeds or not. *Yeeeell!*

So which one could be replaced or combined with our necessary `append()`
expression? We can take the *deque* itself! A checking of its length is
desirably for the win.

```python
def mymap(func, lst):
    deq = deque(lst)
    ret = []

    fn = lambda f, q: fn(f, q) if ret.append(f(q.popleft())) or q else None
    # Dequeue and if q is empty, safely get out of lambda

    fn(func, deq)
    return ret
```

> Nailed it!

Besides the wrapped recursive functions, I also came up with an idea of using a
non-wrapped global function with list concatenation, which might look a little
more straighforward.

```python
def mymap(func, lst):
    deq = deque(lst)
    if not deq: return []
    return [func(deq.popleft())] + mymap(func, deq)
```

If you're curious about their performances, check out
[this gist](https://gist.github.com/anqurvanillapy/fa97acf6f0a6e960ff54854f5596125a)
and run it on your machine for the details (there are also some benchmarks for
the list-slice-implemented `mymap`s, as mentioned above), where the non-wrapped
one would run much slower, while our one-line lambda fellow is the remarkable
winner!

I haven't thoroughly known about why they were much different in performance.
Anyway, *we did it!*

## TBC

Got some suggestions? Some corrections, perhaps? Feel free to reach me and point
them out. *And please stay tuned!*
