title:      PsPs 0x00
date:       Aug 15, 2016
properties: probset

*PsPs* is the abbreviation of **Post-Snooze Problem Set** and, as what it says,
there are just some simple problem sets literally coming out from my waking up,
which sometimes are just some wishy-washy whims.

The problem set solutions are unspectacularly personal and not personable, more
like a private note-taking behavior or putting my finger on what it is which
sticks hard in my brain.

So on paper, it is not gonna be like an enthralling newsletter that you will
come to expect or can accidently wow you, while I do actually start this subtle,
soft-spoken segment, with about 3 problems in a single post.

Here comes the first hellish issue, folks.

## Contents

* 0x0000 Random iteration using py35
* 0x0001 NaN the naughty k1d
* 0x0002 One-line 24 game

## 0. Random iteration using py35

I am an addict of visiting some sites where folks or lonely webmasters share
some relatable images. And one of the sites is equipped with a button that can
shuffle the images and re-arrange the pagination with really decent speed. So I
came away from it with such a question like

> Given a list with 10,000 elements, how to randomly iterate the items and pop
several ones in the same number every time for the purpose of pagination?

I tried to solve it with Python 3.5.2, which is built-in on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS
that I am using, and it is obvious that generating the list comes first for the
question.

```python
seq = list(range(9999))
# seq = range(9999) is fine if we're gonna do it lazily.
```

Well it is so remarkably easy. But I should notice that `range` is kind of like
`xrange` and totally different from that in Python 2.7, which generates the
complete yet deadly list, but we should say `xrange` is remained in Python 3
while it is
[tested](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/15014310/why-is-there-no-xrange-function-in-python3)
as a bit quicker than Python 3's `range`. Furthermore, when `range` object
becomes `list`, it illustrates a transition from immutability to mutability.

And then, import our magical module and shuffle the list!

```python
import random
random.shuffle(seq) # list is mutable
```

Now the sequence is shuffled and looks beautiful when I print them (imagine you
have done the printing with me). So we can pop them into another sequence for
pagination just as putting out something like image ID from the database. And
the shuffled sequence can be stored in the client side (looks not that decent
huh?).

By the way, the speed is satisfactory and imagine it becomes a part of an HTTP
request.

```bash
# best case in 10 runs
$ time python3 -c'import random;seq=list(range(9999));random.shuffle(seq)' 
0.02user 0.00system 0:00.03elapsed 90%CPU (0avgtext+0avgdata 12228maxresident)k
0inputs+0outputs (0major+1431minor)pagefaults 0swaps
```

Back to the game, k1d! Let's do some packaging.

```python
page = [seq.pop() for i in range(10)] # 10 items in a page
```

The sequence was once shuffled so the order now is never critical. Besides, I
can use slices with page index and item number per page defined.

```python
page_index = 1
page_items = 10
page = seq[page_index-1:page_index-1+page_items] # seems kinda ugly now
```

Well, things done, and I give my kudos to `random.shuffle()` which is
essentially magical and makes this solution easy... as hell.

### Nailed it N YU STUCK?

Initially I laid much emphasis on how it could be implemented on the web,
especially thinking in a corny way when many of the sites I visited are written
in PHP or something, but gradually I sat back to think in a pythonic way.

I suggest it will be more interesting if I use other languages like PHP or C to
solve this question, and for more of the time I was thinking about the
algorithmic stuff which is sometimes painful for me and kinda off-kilter if
productivity is heavily concerned, but yes I love Python, when I got
`random.shuffle()` I totally threw off the nerdy cool things. Maybe some day
I will be as bold as picking them up in my future inventive garage.

### Moreover

> *One Eternity Later.*

Yup, I'm back to the trashy garage after several months!

Besides `random.shuffle()`, somehow I got inspired by an array rotating
algorithm that takes constant space and re-wrote this shuffling script. I used
`random.randrange()` to randomly index an item of the sequence, swapping it with
the last item and `list.pop()` it to the `page` list, which seemed basically
sneaky-beaky-like in C for a low-level algorithm implementation.

But wait, it is the mighty Python right? `list.pop([i])` could skip that sneaky
swapping and steal our target!

```python
import random


seq = list(range(1000000))
page = []

for i in range(10):
    randi = random.randrange(len(seq)) # seq is decremental
    page.append(seq.pop(randi))
```

This just runs blazingly faster! You can check out my following sketchy tests.

```bash
# best case in 10 runs, with random range 1,000,000

$ time python3 shuffle.py # using for-loop to create `page'
0.84user 0.00system 0:00.85elapsed 99%CPU (0avgtext+0avgdata 51432maxresident)k
0inputs+0outputs (0major+9693minor)pagefaults 0swaps
$ time python3 shuffle_shorter.py # using list comprehension to create `page'
0.84user 0.00system 0:00.85elapsed 99%CPU (0avgtext+0avgdata 51332maxresident)k
0inputs+0outputs (0major+9696minor)pagefaults 0swaps

$ time python3 randrange.py # our randrange optimization
0.04user 0.01system 0:00.06elapsed 96%CPU (0avgtext+0avgdata 51340maxresident)k
0inputs+0outputs (0major+9692minor)pagefaults 0swaps
```

I should admit that `random.shuffle()` looks magical and subtle, but sometimes
it can barely steal the game.

> P.S. You can try to put this little snippet into a generator or even a `class`
with `__iter__` implemented to throw some iterators, which look more
well-structured and maintainable like some production code. It's going further
so I'm not doing them right here (actually for laziness).

## 1. NaN the naughty k1d

`NaN` or *not a number* seems kinda rare in my daily jobs, but recently I caught
it in some `if` conditions when writing in node which easily drove me up the
wall.

```javascript
> Math.log(-1) === NaN // looks reasonable, right?
false
> // what the heck?
```

So the examples below can bring your some lol wuts as well.

```javascript
> NaN * 1 === NaN
false
> NaN !== NaN
true
```

> Geez.

Certainly, there are a bunch of duplicate questions on Stack Overflow related to
this, revealing that this is a floating point design for some engineering
reasons, yup, neither programmers' nor mathematicians'... You can read
[this answer](http://stackoverflow.com/a/23666623) to have a first command of
this special *value*.

Hey, it's a value! Now can you get it? Or let me rewind this. `NaN` is designed
for propagating the errors like a virus through all calculations. For instance,
imagine a large mathematical expression where there is an imaginary number like
`Math.log(-1)` and you can barely stop the calculating. So `NaN` here is the
naughty kid that makes the final result unreasonable to some extent. Because of
being a special value, it could not spontaneously raise an exception to tell the
user *it is going wrong*, which is not its responsibility (it's of the
interpreter, or the compiler).

E.g. `log(-1)` in py35 and node act differently. The former gives me a
`ValueError`, and node just kicks out a boi called `NaN`.

```python
>>> import math
>>> math.log(-1)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: math domain error
>>> # Note that 1 / 0 will raise a different kind of error
...
>>> 1 / 0
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero
```

Why did I test the `1 / 0` cliche? Because it is really enthralling to run it
in node where it brings me a whole spectacular universe.

```javascript
> 1 / 0
Infinity
```

Back to the topic, the design of `NaN` is meant to make a compromise in a great
number of language-specific scenarios like these above. And it turns out that
the languages are the real naughty kids this time.

## 2. One-line 24 game

> Phew, here's the last one on my 1st PsPs issue!

Once I was on the plane to my hometown on a winter vacation, getting bored by
the journey and deciding to put out my laptop. After its booting up, I opened
the Python interpreter and wrote a handful of ugly code to create a 4-item list
for a 24 game. Well, interpretation is always comfortable and intimate, letting
me take a bunch of steps to make sure I can achieve a tiny little goal.

But several months later, I came up with an idea of packaging it into a single
line of code, making it suitable for a bash command or an alias.

In brief, both list comprehension and `map` are desirable. It looks like this by
using the latter in some readable manner:

```python
import random


random_card = lambda x: random.randint(1, 10)
card_num = range(4)
game = list(map(random_card, card_num))
```

Yup, so the densed one-line command is straightforward now:

```bash
$ python3 -c"import random;print(list(map(lambda x: random.randint(1,10),range(4))))"
```

Anyway, the list-comprehension version looks kinda old-school sheen but shorter:

```bash
$ python3 -c"import random;print([random.randint(1,10)for i in range(4)])"
```

You can try writing a benchmark script to create 1m games at a time to check out
which one is faster, or trust your instincts to shout out the answer by judging
the lengths! Anyway, I can't stop playing the game right now.

## TBC

Got some suggestions? Some corrections, perhaps? Feel free to reach me and point
them out. *And please stay tuned!*
